# Lesson 2: Queries

This lesson mainly touches on frequently used clauses for querying a database.

## `AS`

Rename a column by providing an Alias. e.g.

```sql
SELECT xxx AS 'yyy' FROM zzz;
```
where: 

* xxx => column to be selected
* 'yyy' => new alias
* zzz => table being selected from

## `DISTINCT`

Get all distinct values in the  column (no dupes would be in the result set). 

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT xxx FROM yyy;
```

## `WHERE`

Filters the result to only include where the condition which follows in the clause is true.

```sql
SELECT * FROM xxx WHERE yyy > zzz;
```

## `LIKE` operator

compares similar values.

```sql
SELECT * FROM xxx WHERE yyy LIKE 'a_c';
```

The `_` in the above query is a wildcard. See SQL Wildcards and examples [here](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_wildcards.asp)

## Comparison operators in SQL

* `=`
* `!=`
* `>`
* `>=`
* `<`
* `<=`
* `IS NULL`
* `IS NOT NULL`

## `BETWEEN`

filter result within a certain range.

```sql
SELECT * FROM xxx WHERE yyy BETWEEN 'a' AND 'j';
```

**Imporant Notes:**

* `BETWEEN` two letters **is not** inclusive of the 2nd letter.
* `BETWEEN` two numbers **is** inclusive of the 2nd number.

## `AND` operator

combines multiple conditions for the `WHERE` clause (all conditions **must** be true for the overall statement to be true).

```sql
FROM aaa WHERE bbb BETWEEN 11 AND 22 AND ccc = 'ddd';
```

## `OR` Operator

similar to `AND` but works if just one condition from the many is true.

## `ORDER BY`

for sort results.

```sql
SELECT * FROM xxx ORDER BY yyy DESC;
```

Note: 

* `DESC` => sorts result in descending order
* `ASC` => sorts result in ascending order

## `LIMIT`

specifies maximum number of rows result will have. The clause always goes at the end of the query.

```sql
SELECT * FROM xxx LIMIT 10;
```

## `CASE`

Usually SQL's way of including if-then logic in queries. Important operators to note:

* `WHEN`
* `THEN`
* `ELSE`
* `END`

An example:

```sql
SELECT name
  CASE
    WHEN x > y THEN 'a'
    WHEN x < y THEN 'b'
    ELSE 'c'
  END AS 'review'
FROM movies;
```

## Final note

Use the `SELECT` clause everytime you want to query a database.
